
Hey, welcome back to the lecture.

So, now you have successfully booted your Linux kernel by using the file system which you generated using

busybox, isn't it? Great.

So, now in this lecture let's understand the 'init' program of the busybox and the runlevel scripts

OK? As you know from all of our previous discussion of Linux booting process, Linux finally launches

the init userspace application found in one of these locations.

Right?

as a last step in the kernel initialization.

OK? So, that's the parent of all Linux processes and having the 'pid' number 1. The core to launch the init

program is implemented in the function kernel

init of main.c of the Linux kernel.

So, hope you remember this. In busy box, you can locate this init file under the directory sbin.

Just type ls-l init and you can see that it's pointing back to the busybox.

OK?

Now, there are two types of init programs, which you can use with Linux.

One is busybox init.

OK.

And another one is System V init.

OK?

Both init programs they actually try to execute a special script.

OK?

The busy box init tries to execute a script called rcS, which is present in the directory

/etc/init.d/

of the file system. And system V init program tries to execute a special script called inittab

found in /etc/init.d directory of the file system.

OK?

So, by default, busybox doesn't support system V init program.

OK?

So, for a time being let's not concentrate on system V init program execution.

So, let's keep everything simple.

All right. So, now if we go back to our log here, you'll see one error message emitted by the init program

of the busybox.

OK?

So, here the init program

is saying that, cannot run the rcS script.

OK?

Because, there is no such file or directory.

OK?

That means, the init program, the busybox init program always tries to execute the rcS script present

at this location,

/etc/init.d

OK?

since in our file system, we neither have created etc/init.d folder nor

we have kept any rcS script in the file system,

this error message is obvious, isn't it?

So, what is this

rcS?

So, as I said, rcS is nothing but just a script.

OK?

That is executed by the init program of

the busy box.

OK? So, what you write inside the script,

that depends on you.

You can write anything.

So, here 'S' actually stands for start.

That means, if you have any scripts or services to execute during starting up of the Linux kernel

then you can execute all those scripts our services or commands from this file.

OK?

All right. So, now we will see all these things practically with our hardware.

OK? So, now, in the next lecture I'm going to show you this rcS script and a couple of other scripts

OK.

which we can use to launch some of the services from our file system which we just generated in our

previous lecture.

So, I'll see you in the next lecture.

